O great people, O valiant fighters in our heroic armed forces, peace be upon you.

"We know, and everyone in this brave, patient, honest, heroic nation knows, how much we tried to do what was right -- so much so, perhaps, that some blamed us for how we behaved and how graciously patient we were over hardships sought by those with ulterior motives and how we responded, although it could coincide with the wishes of the weak or those who do not realise the intentions and goals of the American and British administrations, which are driven by accursed Zionism.

"Now we are living through decisive days in which fighters and the great Iraqi people are doing exceptionally well and for which they deserve victory and satisfaction from God -- as He promised the true faithful against the enemies of God and humanity.

"It is our right, nay our duty, to be proud as fighting believers who are patient in this epic war...

"We have always complied, even with what is illegitimate and unjust among the demands and allegations of the evil ones, in the hope that the world would awake and lift the sanctions against our people and so that we avoid the evils of war.

"And after they ran out of excuses or cover, the invading aggressors came openly and shamelessly with vicious intent as we know them and their intentions to be.

"O brothers, you know that our country's policy is to avoid evil. But when evil comes, armed with deceit and destruction, we must face them with faith and holy struggle in a manner which dignifies us and satisfies God.

Dig deeper into the moment.
Special offer: Subscribe for $1 a week for the first year.
"And here you are today standing, o valiant Iraqis, glorious women and brave armed forces, in a manner which pleases friends and the faithful and enrages the enemies and infidels. A stand which will make you victorious, God willing, against your enemies...

"Everyone can see the aggression and injustice and those who were deceived globally by the enemies during and after 1991 have awoken with the general awareness of humanity and the sons of our nation. I herald the near-victory for our patient fighters. These are decisive days, O Iraqis, so attack as God ordered.

"In these battles, in these decisive days the enemy attempted, not only with planes and missiles as in the past, but also with land forces to occupy your land...

Editors’ Picks

In This Nigerian Market, Young Women Find a Place of Their Own

Songwriter or Star? The-Dream, Muni Long and Two Paths to the Grammys.

Shaking Ordinary Ice (Very Hard) Transformed It Into Something Never Seen Before
Continue reading the main story
"These forces have pushed into our land and wherever they encroach they are trapped in our land, leaving the desert behind them, and find Iraqi citizens surrounding them and shooting at them. The (Baath) party, the people, the clans, the Fedayeen of Saddam and national security forces alongside our brave armed forces have done great things which match their calibre.

"Therefore, after underestimating you...the enemy is trapped in the sacred land of Iraq which is being defended by its great people and army.

"O brave fighters, hit your enemy with all your strength. O Iraqis, fight with the strength of the spirit of jihad (holy war) which you carry in you and push them to the point where they cannot go on."

"You (fighters) will reap stability and dignity with victory. For our martyrs the prize of heaven and for you the prize of honour which satisfies God and which will be recorded by history. The lesson you teach the enemy will make them think twice, and even be incapable, of attacking you, your nation and humanity again."

"Hit them so that good and its people may reign and evil evicted back to its place. Mothers, daughters, fathers and sons, together with all the faithful and good, will sleep in comfort after being terrified by aggression. Your struggle will dishearten the aggressor. Oh Arabs, oh faithful of the world, oh those who support justice and oppose evil, we herald the victory that God has promised us in the conflict against the lowlifes and enemies of humanity.